---
layout: post
title: Down The Rabbit Hole
permalink: /down_the_rabbit_hole/
---
How does an isolated, lost and lonely twenty-something find the strength to keep their head above the water long enough for someone to notice them? Realising I was transgender was a difficult process emotionally, it came to me at a time when my friends were far away, I was feeling left behind, and I was struggling to understand "What comes next?"; and though I felt like I was stopped still in time, time marched on anyway. How fortunate then, was I, when I see an upload from a band I followed on YouTube, Steam Powered Giraffes "I'll Rust With You". 

You see, I'd been following the band for a couple of years, their quirky sense of humour, dramatic style and lyrical story telling appealed to my curious nature and they had the character pull it off. If that wasn't enough, there was a small comic series and an entire world written beyond the performances that elevated the art across multiple mediums. 

In this moment, however, I'd found myself caught up in what can only be described as a transitionary period for the band. I'd heard the rumours of course — the comments sections online are always eager to share — that one of the band members was trans. Rumours in mind I tried to keep myself open to the possibility, and unfortunately the time I had spent listening to their earlier tracks had led me to the wrong assumption, and I falsely identified the individual based on the voice of a newer band member. So, to say I was surprised when I pressed the play button and was met not with the debonair rabbit in the back with a melodica but by a striking portrayal of this new rabbit, in a stunning pair of striped tights, a bold skirt combo, and all wrapped up in a tight leather jacket accentuating curves I wouldn't have thought possible a year before, would be to put it lightly. Needless to say the dramatic shift in character was a lot to take in and I'll Rust With you became my top played song on Spotify that year. 

I continued to follow the band as they progressed through the years with their musical story telling, I'd tune into their live stream rehearsals and performances and I tried to keep on top of buying their albums too; but more important to me at the time was keeping up with Isabella "Bunny" Bennet, the person behind the costume. 

Because Bunny was already in the public eye as a performer before she began her transition it was impossible for her to do it in a way that would go unnoticed and so she used her art to put the gears in motion. It could be said that Bunny transitioned twice, first as her character Rabbit, which was written into this fantasy they played, and then as herself later on. Having the opportunity to witness both transformations was profoundly powerful. 

Of course there were other potential influences I could have found, YouTube had no shortage of trans personalities to chase, Caitlyn Jenner had recently made her announcement and was put on the cover of Time and so on, but what those influences didn't have for me was the connection. Bunny wasn't a celebrity to me, she was a fairground busker, she was a gamer, she was a troubled person, and like me she was a twin, she resonated with me in a way the others couldn't. She wasn't perfect, she didn't know everything there was to know about being transgender and she tripped up and made mistakes along the way. What she was however, was honest, and she leant into that. 

Bunny didn't just broadcast her transition through her art, she sat down in front of a camera and kept a video journal of the transformation, sharing updates with the community she'd just begun to build, and years on that community transformed along with her. Of course the music didn't stop and we were introduced to tracks such as "Malfunction", a song written by her twin brother for the band that sought to demonstrate a positive mindset towards mental illness, and later "Transform" a ballad by Bunny herself encompassing the journey she'd taken and reflecting on the past — which featured a haunting addition of a verse from "Honeybee" the song that kickstarted their online following — that felt to me like a clean farewell to the idea of who she used to be; and throughout this journey, I too was undergoing my transition.

My transition however, was a much slower process. Bunny had the benefit of a system where informed consent was possible, and referral based medicine practices were available, I was left to fend for myself fighting the bureaucracy of the NHS. Throughout the years I would spend waiting for that next letter, for a phone call, for some update, I'd go back to Bunny's vlogs, I'd put the music videos on repeat and I'd have a clearer path for what it was all for. It was a definitive example of a future I could have and having that visible representation was nothing short of essential for me.

To this day I still have hurdles to jump, I'm not at the finish line yet and I don't know when I will be. I still go back to I'll Rust With You to remind myself what it's all for, to keep myself motivated that there is an end in sight, and to reflect on the nostalgia that has kept me grounded throughout the journey. Most importantly I go back to encourage myself to remember the importance of representation and visibility, two factors that I try and maintain about myself and that I believe have led me to a position today where I can be what Bunny was to me to someone else who needs it. 

I used to believe that transitioning was a lonely thing, that I'd have to leave friends behind and start again unable to reconcile with the person who I used to be. Bunny taught me that it doesn't have to be that way, and that whilst my transition is mine first and foremost I now recognise that my friends and family have transitioned with me and there's nothing lonely about that.